---
created_at: 2013-01-21
kind: article
title: "My Diet"
---

It's been two and a half years since I first [wrote about nutrition][nutrition]
on this blog. I still agree with a lot of what I said. But my understanding of
human nutrition has expanded hugely—and I've become acutely aware of how much I
don't know, and even how much science doesn't quite grok yet.

  [nutrition]: /2010/07/03/nutrition/

**N.B.:** This post, unlike its predecessor, describes facts. This is what my
diet looks like today.

## Paleo

I've fully bought into the principles of the Paleo diet, albeit synthesizing
various pieces of information from [Robb Wolf][], [Gary Taubes][] of [NuSI][],
[Loren Cordain][], [Sally Fallon Morell][] of the [Weston A. Price
Foundation][weston-a-price], and the [/r/paleo][r-paleo] community.

  [robb wolf]: http://robbwolf.com/
  [gary taubes]: http://garytaubes.com/
  [nusi]: http://nusi.org/
  [loren cordain]: http://thepaleodiet.com/
  [sally fallon morell]: http://www.westonaprice.org/about-the-foundation/welcome-from-sally-fallon-morell
  [weston-a-price]: http://www.westonaprice.org/
  [r-paleo]: http://reddit.com/r/paleo

This means I don't eat grains or legumes of any kind. I typically don't eat
fruits or starches due to the carb content, but occasionally eat berries. I
love sauerkraut and most fermented foods. I don't drink milk (although until
recently I used to have heavy cream with my coffee), and am trying to eliminate
fresher cheeses. When I have chocolate, it's [Lindt Excellence
90%][lindt-90]—this stuff is hardcore but tasty in small amounts.

  [lindt-90]: https://www.lindtusa.com/product-exec/product_id/216/category_id/21/nm/Excellence_90_Cocoa_Bar

In fact, most of my diet now consists of meat with various herbs and spices,
grilled or fried in saturated animal fats (mainly lard and beef dripping,
sometimes ghee). I also love fried eggs, [mayonnaise][], [sausages][], burgers
and [espressi][].

  [mayonnaise]: http://www.amazon.co.uk/DELOUIS-562-Delouis-Mayonnaise-Pack/dp/B003O51BZQ/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1358788763&sr=8-1
  [sausages]: http://helenbrowningsorganic.co.uk/speedy-sausages.html
  [espressi]: http://www.nespresso.com/

## Ketosis

The next big feature of my diet is that it is almost bereft of
carbohydrates—I'm in full [ketosis][], a state in which my primary carb stores
(blood glucose, liver & muscle glycogen) are depleted, so most of the cells in
my body have switched to fatty acid metabolism for energy. However, fatty acids
can't cross the blood-brain barrier, so my liver makes small molecules called
ketones from fats which can be used for energy by my brain cells.  It's these
ketone bodies which can be tested for using [Ketostix][], but these days I
don't really need to do that, because I can *feel* when I'm in ketosis. The
[/r/keto][r-keto] community was really helpful to me when starting a low-carb
diet, and I still take inspiration from the progress pics posted there and on
[/r/theketodiet][r-keto2].

  [ketosis]: https://docs.google.com/a/zacharyvoase.com/document/d/1aiHSPoto_YqsNTDvL-g60nytMnyH-CJcCbiAx1IEUYM/edit
  [ketostix]: http://www.amazon.co.uk/Ketostix-Reagent-Strips-Ketone-strips/dp/B000V3IV3O
  [r-keto]: http://reddit.com/r/keto
  [r-keto2]: http://reddit.com/r/theketodiet

I first entered ketosis in August 2012, and I've more or less kept it up since
(except over Christmas & New Year's Day, where I dropped out of it for a couple
of days). The main benefit to me has been the ability to eat large quantities
of [meat][] and still lose weight, but I've noticed several improvements in
terms of mental clarity, sleep continuity, bowel behavior (I'm being candid
here), lack of cravings, and consistent daily energy levels. Whilst I see other
people slumped over their desks (or reaching for cookies, snacks or coffee) at
3PM, I feel great.

  [meat]: http://meat.io

## Sweeteners

In November 2012 I made the difficult decision to cut out all artificial
sweeteners (including Stevia, which is rare in the UK anyway). There are
[reasons][sweet-study] to believe that they have harmful effects on the gut
microbiome, which is a fragile and important part of the human body. Quitting
sweet stuff has been hard, but I just replaced my normal Coke Zero with
sparkling water and dealt with it (and I used to drink liters of Coke Zero on a
daily basis).

  [sweet-study]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18800291

## Exercise & Supplements

I lift weights regularly now, and I'm following an improvised [Starting
Strength][]-style program (i.e. mostly free weight work, lots of squats).
Ketosis does adversely affect exercise performance, so I take a [waxy maize
starch][] supplement pre- and post-workout to give me a small baseline glucose
level over a couple of hours. This use-case is [backed up by
science][wms-study], it seems—WMS is often sold as a 'fast-acting carb', but
the reason I use it is because it is actually a 'slow carb'. Sometimes I'll
take 30g pre-workout and 20g afterwards, and within an hour I'm back in
ketosis.

  [starting strength]: http://startingstrength.com/
  [waxy maize starch]: http://www.myprotein.com/uk/products/waxy_maize_starch
  [wms-study]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19628104

I also take pre- and post-workout [creatine monohydrate][], and post-workout
[leucine][] and [whey protein][], all with cinnamon for palatability.

  [creatine monohydrate]: http://www.myprotein.com/uk/products/creatine_monohydrate
  [leucine]: http://www.myprotein.com/uk/products/l-leucine
  [whey protein]: http://www.pulsin.co.uk/protein-powders/whey-protein-isolate/whey-protein-isolate-1kg.html

## Imitations and Substitutes

I have a strong bias against Paleo and low-carb imitation food (e.g. 'Paleo'
bread, cheesecake, cookies, etc.). I adhere to this diet because I believe
those foods are fundamentally harmful, and just because you make them without
gluten does not stop them being [dense acellular carbohydrates][dac], or
otherwise abnormally concentrated sources of nutrients, good or bad. Following
the [Weston A.  Price Foundation][weston-a-price] and other scientific sources
has taught me how important the gut microbiome is in chronic inflammation, and
it's not just one's 'macros' (protein/carb/fat ratios) which matter in a diet.

  [dac]: http://www.dovepress.com/comparison-with-ancestral-diets-suggests-dense-acellular-carbohydrates-peer-reviewed-article-DMSO-MVP

## Sleep

Sleep is often a forgotten component in any weight-loss or health program.
Whilst it's not strictly diet-related, it's worth talking about.  The fact is
that **you will not lose fat** if you don't sleep well. 'Well' means getting a
solid 8-hour sleep, or two solid 4-hour chunks. Human Growth Hormone levels are
[highest when you're asleep][hgh-sleep], and require deep sleep to peak. Better
sleep quality is associated with [increased fat loss][sleep-fat], and bad sleep
quality [undermines fat loss][sleep-fat-2].

  [hgh-sleep]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC297368/
  [sleep-fat]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22854682
  [sleep-fat-2]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20921542

A number of nutrient deficiencies can lead to bad sleep patterns; magnesium is
the lowest-hanging fruit for this. I take a small magnesium supplement, and try
not to be exposed to any bright, artificial light for an hour or so before
sleeping. I also don't drink coffee in the afternoon any more—just a morning
espresso to jump-start my brain.

## Results

I haven't seen overnight dramatic weight loss. Instead I've seen steady (but
cumulatively big) changes in my overall wellbeing, fat mass, bodily functions
and mental acuity. I believe I've been naturally 'designed' to eat animals and
carry heavy things, and that living up to my evolutionary heritage is the best
way for me to be healthy and happy.

> Life in all its fullness is mother nature obeyed.  
> — **Weston A. Price**
